Okay,
welcome to the Mac OS X printing session.
For those who haven't met me,
my name is Howard Miller.
I'm the engineering manager
for the printing team.
Before we get started here,
let's see if we can wake
people up a little bit.
I know you guys got the party tonight,
so everybody was trying
to sleep in this morning,
so I thank you for being here.
I see a lot of people out there
that I know to be printer driver,
printer developers.
How many of these guys do we have?
A lot, many from around the world.
Thank you for being here.
How many people are brand
new to the Mac platform?
[Transcript missing]
In terms of what we've added in
our featureless OS Snow Leopard,
we've changed some things.
Ad printers changed.
We've exposed some power of CUPS.
There'll be access control lists,
users and passwords per printer queue.
The queue window,
we've added an inline preview,
which lets you see your job in flight,
which is great.
We've done some stuff to integrate more
tightly with multifunction devices.
Major changes and
improvements to our SDK.
I mentioned the driver thing,
and then of course CUPS 1.4.
Everybody's seen the system preferences.
Everybody knows about the
little plus to add printer,
and everybody knows on Leopard you get
this floating window that you can lose.
It's now a sheet.
You will not be losing that anymore.
Look at it closely.
We've also greatly simplified it.
No 47 different tool items
to pick across the top.
Bad news is it's in your seed,
but you can't see it.
So you'll see the old one for right now,
but in a future seed we'll get
that one turned on for you.
In the...
In the sharing controls,
there's always been printer sharing.
Now you'll notice that you can
actually add access control.
So you can select a printer and
hit the plus button in terms
of who can use the printer,
and then you can add users or groups.
So now on a per-printer basis,
you can provide user password.
In our desktop printer,
this is in your seed,
We have the view of print jobs,
so you can hit the View button,
and you will get the quick look view
of items that are in your print queue.
We're going to try to do more with this,
but we'll see how far we get
as we progress through the OS,
but at least now you
can see your print jobs.
Also in the printer proxy,
though not in your seed,
you'll be able to scan directly
from the desktop printer.
The support that we're
trying to build in,
the concept is grab any
handful of pictures,
throw them on your scanner.
We will find them, identify their bounds,
straighten them, crop them,
and give you individual pictures.
You should be able to scan directly
into preview so you can see them.
You should be able to scan
to your desktop or iPhoto.
This sheet, this capability is also
being exposed system-wide.
Every application will
be able to pick this up.
So scanning is no longer
a corner case hidden item.
We think it's going to be mainstream.
Of course, if you're making printers,
you know that half or three-quarters
of all printers sold are multifunction,
so there's a scanner there anyway.
So if your printer driver developer,
many of them are in the room,
provide an ICA-compatible driver,
this functionality becomes
almost free for your application.
Let me talk a little bit about some
of the things that are changing.
AppleTalk was invented before
many people I know were born.
It has been an absolutely
wonderful protocol.
It has served everyone extremely well.
It is no longer in Snow Leopard.
It goes and it ends.
It will not be there.
The first printer I worked on at
Apple was the LaserWriter 16600.
Does anybody in the room
still have one of those?
Yeah, they're very reliable.
They're great printers.
They're officially done.
Companies, you know, Lexmark, Brother,
sell great printers.
HP will give you a rebate
or discount right now.
So for about $300,
you can replace that 16600 with a great
PostScript printer by a manufacturer,
many of them, higher resolution,
higher speed.
Apple Talk is dead.
If somebody thinks they have a customer
installation where this is a big problem,
send us mail.
We'll try and work through.
But our official answer is bonkers.
Bonjour.
Bonjour has officially
been in the OS since 10.3.
In 10.2, it had a different name,
which we won't talk about.
But virtually every PostScript and most
network printers do support Bonjour with
an underlying IP print transport layer.
So that's our official answer.
You will not find Apple Talk.
It is not a bug.
A few other things,
and I put gradients on these.
Tioga printer drivers.
This is where we introduced with DP4,
was part of Mac OS X, the original.
We integrated CUPS many years ago in X2,
and we've been encouraging
people to move to CUPS drivers.
Starting in Tiger,
we felt that every driver
could be created with CUPS.
We are now removing all
the Tioga header files.
You will no longer be able to build
Tioga technology drivers on Snow Leopard.
Likewise, Carbon PDEs, again,
introduced at the beginning of Mac OS X,
and we have switched to
Cocoa PDEs officially in X4,
and we are removing all
of the headers for this.
This would include application
panes and print dialogues.
So anybody who's adding those and
you're still using the old Carbon PDEs,
be aware you will no longer be
able to build them on Snow Leopard.
That said,
Tioga drivers that are well-written,
Mike will talk later about
what may be not well-written,
but well-written Tioga drivers should
continue to run on Snow Leopard.
A well-written Carbon PDE will
run on Snow Leopard.
One problem, Carbon PDEs will not run
in 64-bit applications.
On your seed today,
you will find many of the
Apple applications have already
been converted to 64-bit.
Preview, for example.
Customers do not have a
switch to say run 32-bit,
run 64-bit.
So if you've provided Carbon PDEs,
many of the applications your users have
on Snow Leopard are going to be 64-bit,
and so your Carbon PDEs will not run.
So yet another reason to move to Cocoa.
Okay, so I mentioned a little
bit about image capture.
For those interested,
there is an image capture
session later on today.
There is a lab directly
following this meeting.
It's always been the tradition
to meet in the hallway,
but this year we got smart.
We scheduled the lab right
after the printing session.
So just move on down.
We're the second to
the last on the right,
the media lab.
Most of the engineering
team will be there.
Developer support will be there.
Evangelism will be there.
We should be able to answer just
about any question that you've got.
So we're going to talk about today,
which I kind of hinted at.
We're going to cover
application printing.
We're going to start from the basics.
We're going to start with
the most fundamental APIs,
and we will move through
the printing stack and show
you the APIs of importance.
We're going to show you how
to customize the print dialog.
We will give you some pointers and tips
as to how to produce high-quality output.
And then there's a few
header file changes,
which I alluded to.
We'll show you in
detail what we're doing.
After that,
we're going to talk about CUPS,
and we'll go through the
background for those who haven't
been fully familiar with CUPS.
We'll show you its architecture,
and then we'll spend some time on
exactly what's new in Snow Leopard,
which is CUPS 1.4.
So with that,
I want to introduce Alan Beck,
who's going to talk about
application printing.
Thank you, Howard.
So today, well, actually,
first I want to say it's great
to be up here again this year.
It's a great WWDC,
and I am going to basically be talking
about the application printing and how it
relates basically to Cocoa applications.
So we're going to start talking about the
basics of how do you get your application
to get output onto your paper.
Then we'll just move on to how
to customize the print dialog,
and not just the print dialog,
how do you customize the printing
experience for your user.
Then we'll go on to how to
produce high-quality output,
and finally,
utilizing print core printing.
So here are the basic APIs that
application developer sees.
On the very top,
we have your application.
Then we move down to the
Cocoa Printing classes.
This is the basic API that your
application should be using.
Then underneath that,
the Cocoa Printing Classes are
built on the core printing APIs.
And finally, we have the CUPS,
the Common Unix Printing System,
which is CUPS,
which basically does all the real
work for the printing system.
So right now,
we're gonna dive a little more
into the Cocoa Printing Classes.
There are basically only five
classes in all of the Cocoa stack
that deals with printing,
and they're basically very easy.
First, we have NS Printer,
which basically encapsulates
Information about the printer,
like what options it has, is it duplex,
what options are installed,
what list of papers does it support?
It's just basically your access
to information about the printer.
Next we have the NS Print Info,
which basically contains
information about a print job,
like how many copies you have,
whether you want NUP,
and then we get into some of
the page setup information,
what page size was selected,
and the scaling that the
user may have chosen.
Then we have the NSPrintPanel
and NSPageLayout,
which is basically it's the print
dialog or the page setup dialog.
It's how they get onto the screen.
And finally,
we have the NSPrintOperation,
which basically grabs all of those
together and puts them in one object
that you can get access to and get
the information out that you need.
These classes basically provide all
the information that you need as
an application developer to print.
They're very simple,
they're really not that complex,
and they're very easy to use,
as I will show you.
As I said before, these classes are built
upon core printing,
so you as the application developer
should never really need to
go down to the core printing
API except for certain cases,
which I'll explain later.
And if you base your application
on the NS document model,
a lot of this is done for free.
The Cocoa printing system
handles adding the print dialog,
running the print dialog.
There's just a very few operations
that you would need to override
to get basic printing to work.
So let's talk about what's the minimal
set that an outpatient would need to
use to get the user to be able to print.
There's basically three easy steps.
There's only three steps that you
need to get your application to print.
First of all,
you'd create an NSPrint operation,
then you'd run the operation,
which basically put the print
dialog up on the screen,
and then you would draw the
content and your views draw erect.
So here's some basic sample code.
So in your Views Draw Rect,
what's passed in is the rect of
the page that you're printing.
And you would use the
Core Graphics APIs to draw the
content for your application,
whether it be lines, text,
whatever you need to draw.
So, and one other thing is this
is the same draw rack that is
used to draw to the screen.
So there is no difference between drawing
on paper and drawing to the screen.
The same methods are called.
Okay, now let's say your user selects
the print command from the menu.
This is what you would need to do.
First of all,
you'd create a print operation.
And one of the, yeah,
it just basically has two parameters.
One of them is the view,
is my print view, basically is the view
that you want to print.
And the second parameter
is the print info.
Basically,
it's the encapsulation of the information
that we need to actually print the job,
like I said, copies, pages,
and all the other stuff
that the user may select.
And finally, you run the operation.
There are two ways to run the operation.
One of them is as a sheet
on your document window,
which is the preferred way of
presenting the print dialog.
And the other one is just run operation,
which basically runs it as a
modal dialog for your application.
So here we're doing it as a sheet.
So we're calling the print operations
runOperationModalForWindow.
We give it our document window.
We tell it which delegate to use,
which is ourself,
and then we pass in the did run selector,
which basically is this method will
be called when the dialog goes away.
So you will know...
You will know when the dial
goes away and if you need to do
any cleanup after that point.
And then when the dialogue goes away,
the printing system,
the Cocoa Printing classes will
then call your view sequentially,
page by page.
We'll do a draw rock for page one.
You will go ahead and draw
your page one information.
We'll call draw rock again for page
two with a different rectangle,
basically going down,
stepping down your view
on a per-page basis.
So it's very simple.
You draw on your draw rect,
you create a print operation,
then you run the print operation.
So now that we've talked
about how you get,
how your application draws,
let's talk about more,
a little bit about how do you
customize your printing experience.
There's multiple ways you can do that.
First of all is you
customize the print dialog.
This basically allows you to
present information to the user
that you think is important.
You can customize the printing
experience by doing custom pagination.
And finally,
you can use the core printing
APIs to do some other stuff as well.
So let's talk a little bit
more about customizing print
dialog and ways that you as an
application developer can do this.
You can add page setup
functionality to the print dialog.
If your application creates, draws,
and formats data on the fly,
there really is no need
for a page setup menu item.
There is no document that is associated
with that page setup information.
So you can actually add these
items to the print dialog.
As you can see right here,
Use applications can specify which
of the page set of items you want.
You can have page size, orientation,
and/or scale.
You can pick any combination of these.
Say you only want to allow orientation
to change in your application.
You can just say,
"I want to add the orientation."
Then if you do this,
if you do add it to the page setup,
print dialog,
go ahead and remove the page setup
menu item from your file menu.
There is no need for it.
The user,
if you're going to do it at print time,
the user doesn't want to have
to decide which one do I do?
Do I want to do in the page setup dialog,
or do I want to do it
in the print dialog?
So just remove the page
setup item if you think it's
appropriate for your application.
I want to say this is very easy to do.
Here again, basically you have two steps.
First of all,
You create your printer
operation like we did before,
so there's no change there.
And then from the print operation,
you go ahead and get
your print panel out.
This is the encapsulation.
of the print dialog for your application.
So basically, you get the print panel
out of the print operation.
And lastly,
what you do is you set the options that
you want for your print panel to show.
In this case,
We want to show just the
paper size and orientation.
So what we do is we
call in the print panel,
we tell it to set its options to.
We get the current options,
which basically is the default options.
It says I want copies, I want page range,
basically I want preview,
and all that stuff.
You get the current operations,
then you just orient the
options that you want,
which I'm orienting in to show
paper size and show orientation.
So again, it's very simple.
There's basically two steps.
You get the print panel
from the print operation,
your current print operation,
then you just set the options for the
print panel to what you want to show.
Another way your application might want
to customize the print dialog is to
not show our copies or our page range.
They're not needed.
Say your application always
wants to print five copies of
every document that prints.
Therefore,
you would just remove the copies
field from the print dialog.
- And it wouldn't show.
Same thing with page range.
But here it's like,
if your application do a
better job of page range,
go ahead and do it.
Don't show ours and show yours.
In this case,
They're not showing ours,
and they're doing their own page range,
which allows them to do the
textual version of page range,
one to three, five, seven, and nine.
That's one way of doing it.
So basically,
if your application can do a
better job than what we're doing,
go ahead and don't show
ours and show yours.
And again, here again, it's very easy.
It's just like the page setup.
Adding the page setup items,
you just basically,
it's an option that you set
in the print panel's options,
basically taking away the
page range or the copies.
Print selection.
This has been Instance Leopard.
For some applications,
basically we're providing a
common UI to allow your users
to only print a selection.
Windows users have had
this for a long time,
and we're just allowing you
to have the common UI to say,
only let the user print the selection.
You have to opt in for this
functionality just like everything else,
but the problem is,
we as a printing system,
we don't know what your selection is.
So what we're going to do is we're going
to set this key in the NS Print Info,
we're going to set the
KPM Print Selection Only key
in the NS Print Info.
Then when it comes time to draw,
it's up to you,
the application developer,
to read the value out of the
print settings and decide,
"Do I want to draw my whole
document or just only selection?"
So here it is.
You have the pages.
We have the all from,
and we added a third radio button,
which is just selection.
So I'm going to do a quick demo
of how easy it is to add print
selection to your application.
So I have a version of Sketch,
my favorite sample app.
I've done, it's the basic Sketch that
is on your WWDC DVD,
with just a few minor changes.
I will get to them soon.
Okay, so let's just open,
this is a document-based application.
So I'm going to open up NSDocument,
their Sketch's document override,
or subclass.
I'm going to go down to
Print Operation with Settings.
Here we are.
This is where we create
the print operation.
The only change I've made to this is,
in the rendering view,
it used to just pass
An array of your graphics that you have.
Actually, before I do that,
let's go ahead and run it so you
can see what Sketch looks like.
So basically, it has a bunch of,
you can have squares, circles, and lines,
and text, and whatever you want.
And so basically, it's just an array of
these graphics objects.
And you can select, you know,
multiple selections and stuff like that.
So the basic version of Sketch,
Basically, it used to pass in the
adjacent array of the graphics.
For dealing with print selection,
we need more than just
the array of the graphics,
we need the array controller,
which basically gives us the graphics
and the current selection in the array.
So basically,
I'm just passing the array controller
versus just the basic array.
So here's the print operation.
They've created the print operation.
That hasn't changed.
And we just come down here a little bit.
And you might recognize this code,
because I just showed you it
for adding the page setup stuff.
So basically, here I am.
I'm getting the print panel
out of the print operation.
And secondly, I set the options.
I have the print panel set the
options to the current options,
and I'm lowering in the
NS Print Panel Shows Print Selection.
So that's all there is to
getting the print selection
to show in the print dialog.
So now let's go to your
actually drawing code.
So let's go down to the rendering view,
and we're at the draw rect.
So in Sketch's DrawRect,
first thing we're going to do
is we're going to get the print
operation by just asking for the
current operation that's going on.
And from the print operation,
we go ahead and get the print
settings out of the operation.
We get the print info,
and from there we get the dictionary,
which is the print settings.
And from there,
we go ahead and read the value of
the K print selection only key.
So basically what I'm doing is
I'm asking the print settings
to get the object for key,
and I'm passing in which
key I'm looking for,
which is the K print selection only key.
And if it's true,
I'm saying the user wants
to print the selection only.
Now let's... Okay, so we have that.
Next is the index set.
Basically, here's the getting the,
out of our graphics controller,
getting the graphics.
And now we're out of the
same graphics controller,
we're going to get the set
of the selection indexes.
Basically, it's the objects that have
been selected in the window,
the user has selected in the window.
So now we have all that stuff,
it's time to draw.
So in our draw,
we're actually going to do the draw.
Let's go ahead and get rid
of both of these comments.
Okay, we have a graphic right here.
If we're not printing selection only,
we're always gonna draw it,
which is fine.
But if the user has selected
print selection only,
we say, ask,
is this graphic in the selection index?
And if it is in the index,
Then we will go ahead and draw that.
If it's not in the index, we won't draw.
Let's just go ahead and
run and see how this works.
Add some objects again, here we go.
And let's add some lines.
Okay,
for you guys to see a little bit better,
let's go ahead and...
Color some of these.
Green, let's get a red, and a blue.
Let's get a pink.
Thinking of my nine-year-old daughter,
she loves pink.
Okay, so let's go ahead and print this.
Actually, let's make sure we have some,
let's say I have a couple items selected.
Let's go ahead and print.
As you can see,
we now have the print selection
item available to the user.
And as you, you know,
slick between printing all pages
or just printing selection,
the...
Our draw record is being called,
and we are determining
whether we should draw,
go through and determining
whether we should draw these.
Okay, so that's basically how
you add print selection.
It's very easy.
As you can see,
we just added the option to say we want
to show print selection to the user,
and then in a draw rect,
we determine whether we need
to draw the selection or not,
and then we...
When it's time to draw that object,
we check the value and we draw it or not.
One last thing I want to do just to show
you how easy it is in Cocoa to do some of
the other stuff I talked about earlier.
We are in the Print Panel,
we are set options.
Let's go here,
let's go and see what we have.
Let's go ahead and add an orientation.
Let's just orient.
orientation here,
and let's try just running this one.
We're going to stop that.
And here again, brings the print dialog.
As you can see, we added orientation,
and with just that one little oaring in,
Everything just works.
The printing system takes
care of the Cocoa classes,
and the printing system takes
care of that the orientation
is changing on the printer.
You, as the application developer,
didn't have to do anything.
So that's basically all for the demo.
It's just to show you
how easy it is to add,
to customize the print dialog.
Let's go back to the slides.
So I said,
there's only basically two actions
that you need to do to add print
selection to a print dialog.
First of all was ORing in the
flag to the print options,
and then in your draw rect,
only checking the value of
what was set in the print info,
and then choosing whether you
need to draw the selection or not.
Adding application panes.
That's another way that your application
can customize a user's experience.
The application panes are always the
first panes that are shown in the dialog.
As you can see here,
preview is the first item
in the pop-up menu list.
And it brings the important
print options to the front.
So basically,
if your application has items
or has options that the user
needs to select at print time,
this is how you would add them would
be through an application pane.
This is a little more difficult than
oaring in a flag in the print options,
but it's really not that difficult to add
an accessory view to the print dialog.
Basically, here's the basic steps.
You subclass the NSViewController,
that's what the application
panes are based off of,
they are a view controller,
and you adopt the
NSPrintPanelAccessorizing protocol,
which basically adds some
methods that you can implement
To make the preview work and
do other things to make your
accessory view work correctly.
Then you create a nib for your view,
basically an interface builder,
create the options that you need.
Next, you would implement the key pass
values for affecting preview.
What a, that's kind of a tongue twister.
Basically,
this allows the printing system,
the Cocoa printing system,
to watch for these values.
You return a set of these.
And so basically, when these values,
they will sit and
observe these key paths.
And as these key paths change,
the printing system will know that
we need to update the preview.
So it basically allows for the
live updating of the preview
as the user changes value.
The next two of these are optional.
It's basically implement
the localized summary items.
Basically,
this allows your application pane
to have an entry in the summary
panel of the print dialog to allow
the user to see in one quick glance
all the print settings that the
user is going to be printing with.
The next is title.
This is the title of your
pane in the panel pop-up menu.
We give you the default title
of your application name.
If you want something else,
just go ahead and override this method.
to
To add your own title.
Then you add the accessory
view to the print panel.
And that's basically,
then you run the dialog,
and basically that's it.
The old-style version of adding
accessory views is deprecated.
So we're basically asking developers,
application developers,
to use this new view controller method
to add application paints to the dialog.
So here's, I'm going to go through some
code samples of basically showing
you what is needed to add an
accessory view to the print dialog.
First of all, you declare your class.
We are declaring a
PrintPanelViewController and a
subclassed OffaViewController.
Then we adopting,
and then we have the little brackets,
which means we're adopting the
NS Print Panel Accessorizing Protocol.
And there's only one public method,
which is basically creating
our shared controller,
which we do right here.
Basically, this method just basically
creates a shared controller.
If we have a static version
of our shared controller,
if it's nil, we go and create it.
We do an alloc of it,
and we init it with our nib,
which is basically the
nib that we created,
the NSD print accessory view,
and we give it no bundle,
and we return it,
return our shared controller.
The next thing we do would be
go ahead and create your nib.
Sample I've here is basically
it has one checkbox.
It's basically do we want to
print a frame around the page
for every page that prints.
And in this example,
I use bindings in Interface Builder.
I bound the checkbox to modifying the
file's owner print page frame key path.
Okay, now dealing with the KVO stuff,
dealing with how do we get the
preview to know that you've
changed stuff and how to redraw it,
it needs to be redrawn.
So basically we have the key value,
key paths for values affecting preview.
Basically we're asking you
to return a set of all the
key paths that you will be,
the user has the option of changing
that needs to be reflected in
the preview of the print dialog.
Then we have the KVO methods,
which is basically dealing
with those key paths,
the set and get methods.
Basically, the get method,
the print page frame,
and the set page frame.
For this example,
we're just reading it out of
the NS user defaults and the
print page frame preference key.
We're either getting it or we're
setting it in NS user defaults.
Then we have the summary and
the title that I talked about.
For localized summary items,
basically we're asking you to
return a localized summary item
The Mac OS X printing system is a very
complex array of summary dictionaries.
It's kind of long.
Basically,
we want you to return us an array,
and the array should contain
dictionaries of lines that you
want to show on the summary dialog.
In this case,
here we have the print page frame,
which is basically the name of the item.
Then we have the
description of that item,
which is the NS Print Panel Accessory
Summary Item Description Key,
which is basically whether
we want to print the,
if we check to see are we
printing the page frame or not,
and we just set it to be on or off,
and we return the array.
So it's really not that hard to add
summary items to the summary pane.
Then we have the title,
for the title of your pane.
Basically, we turn in a string,
and this one is basically
my sample application.
You only need to do this if you want
something different than your application
name as the name of your panel.
Now we're almost done with this.
Basically, kind of like setting the other
options for the print dialog,
you take the print panel and you add your
accessory controller to the print panel.
And that's basically it.
Then it will be added when
the dialogue is brought up,
the operation is run,
your panel will be the first panel shown.
And lastly, in your view method,
You basically read the value
out of the preferences file.
If it's set,
say they want to print the page frame,
we just set the color and frame
the rect of our views bounds.
So basically here's a little example.
It's Sketch again.
We have the print page frame.
User clicks it.
The frame is put around.
Page in the preview.
So everything,
because we did the KVO stuff
that I talked about,
we know that the preview needs to be
drawn when the user clicks the button.
So if you are going to be adding
a panel to the print dialog,
here's a few guidelines that we have.
We ask that you shouldn't be
providing formatting options.
It's just print time options
that the user needs to change,
that you feel the user needs to set,
or options the user needs to have to
affect what gets printed on the page.
And not every application needs one.
There are plenty of other panels
that will show up in the dialog,
whether it be our panels like
layout and all the print panels
for setting quality and stuff.
So just don't add a panel just
for the sake of adding a panel.
If it's not needed for your application,
don't add one.
Suggested width,
we have 420 pixels as the maximum.
If you go beyond that,
we will need to grow the print dialog,
resize it,
and move it when your panel is selected.
So basically, we're asking that you
keep it to 420 maximum.
Another thing we're asking is,
you saw my nib that I created,
my view was the smallest view
I have around my checkbox.
We, the printing system,
will take care of centering that
and centering it in the space
available for the print panels.
You don't need to worry about
going to the full width of the 420.
So we're asking you to make
it as small as possible,
and we will take care of the centering
of your panel in the print dialog.
Suggested height, 380 scanlines.
Think about the MacBooks
and MacBook Airs.
They have a maximum
height of 800 scanlines.
So if you go beyond a certain amount,
the print button falls off the
bottom of the print dialog,
and the users are like, oh no,
what do I do now?
I can't print.
So we're asking you to...
The maximum is 380 scanlines to allow
all users of all of our different
computers to be able to see the print
button at the bottom of the dialog.
Application view versus inline preview.
As you know, in Leopard,
we added the inline preview,
but that doesn't mean your application
should not have the viewing of the
of the printing in your application.
WizardWig is still very
important to our users.
What the user sees on the screen is what
they want to see printed on the paper.
So don't rely on...
This little preview to show the
user what they're going to print.
They may want to see what
it's going to look like before
they hit the print dialog.
If it's a format that the user
likes to view it in on the screen,
why not have it for
the print view as well?
There again,
WYSIWYG is very important to our users.
And here's a great example of what
we're talking about with the print view.
In iPhoto, we have the print card
calendar and book views.
As you can see,
this is what's going to be shown.
This is what is going to be...
Printed on the paper.
We have the user can change layout,
they can change borders,
they can change a lot of the options
to change what happens on the paper,
but they can all do it right here
and the user sees exactly what
is going to be printed on the
[Transcript missing]
So in summary,
customizing the print dialog, it's easy.
Basically, that's what I wanna say.
It's very easy for you
to get what you want.
If I could summarize in one item,
it'd be my last item,
you get to specify what is shown
in the print dialog that makes
sense for your application.
If you wanna do page range,
Hide ours and do yours.
If you want to add options
to the print dialog,
add it and add your own print panel.
It's very easy for you to get the
options that you want and to create
the printing user experience that
makes sense for your application.
Now let's talk a little bit about
the print driver developers.
Print driver developers,
they don't have access to the
NSView controllers or anything like that.
But we do have the
Cocoa-based print dialogues.
So basically you have the whole
bindings in the interface builder to
create your nibs and stuff like that.
So it is a much richer experience
for the developer to use their
Cocoa print dialogue plugins.
They work all the way back
to Mac OS Tiger and later.
And basically we're saying don't create
the old Carbon CF plugin-based dialogues.
They were deprecated in Tiger,
and as Howard said,
they only run in 32-bit mode,
in 32-bit applications.
If you are a driver developer,
you have to worry about the
architectures that you are building.
On OS X,
The application is in
charge of the architecture,
whether it be PowerPC running in Rosetta,
Intel 32, or Intel 34.
So we're asking our drivers and
developers to make sure you build
your plug-ins three-way FAT.
We have PowerPC for the
PowerPC apps running in Rosetta.
We have Intel 32 and Intel 64.
So basically,
the processors have to match
the application and the plug-in,
and the 32 versus 64-bit has to match.
As well as, we have to make sure you have
garbage collection enabled in your,
or aware in your plug-in.
So basically, add your finalized
methods to your plug-in,
and the system will basically turn on or
off garbage collection for your plug-in
based on if the application you're
running in is garbage collected or not.
Howard Miller, Mike Sweet
So basically, if you don't do this,
you're going to get this,
and a lot of your print-- your
users are going to get this,
and a lot of the print
dialogues they see,
basically,
The architectures don't match.
We couldn't run your plugin.
We couldn't run your print panel,
so those options are not
available to the users to select.
Custom pagination.
Let's move away from the print
dialog and start dealing with
your actually drawing code.
Custom pagination allows you to
basically stop that line being split
between page three and page four.
You just cut off right in the middle.
So basically,
it's very easy to do in Cocoa.
There's basically two
methods that you worry about.
We have the Nose Page Range,
which basically tells
the printing system,
hey, I know my page range.
And yes, I will be able to tell
you what you need to know.
So basically, here we go.
We have Nose Page Range.
It passes back a range,
and whether you basically
know your page range or not.
So in this case,
we get the bounds of our view,
and then we go ahead and
get the print page height,
which is basically how high
is the single page height.
for this print job.
And then we go and set our range.
Basically, we have starting at page one,
and we have, say, five pages.
Basically,
we get the height of our bounds and
divide it by the print page height.
That tells us how many pages we
need plus one because of the zero.
And the second method you need to
do is basically a rect for page.
You told me how many pages you have.
You told the printing system
how many pages you have.
Now we're going to go through,
as each page is about to be printed, hey,
we're going to ask you what
rect you want for this page.
So we say we pass in page one.
You tell us what rect of your
view you want us to call your
draw rect with for page one.
We continue doing that for page two,
three, four.
So when we get to page four, we tell you,
okay, what's the rect for page four?
You do your calculations
that you need to do,
and you tell us the rect that...
He tells the rect for that page.
This example is a very simple example.
We get our bounds,
we get our page height,
then we make our rect.
Basically, the left and the right are
the size of our bounds.
The only thing that
really matters is the...
is the origin.
Basically, we take our bounds minus the
page number that's being passed
in times the page height.
So it's very easy to add custom
pagination to your application.
So basically, users don't get stuff,
you know, a little end on page three and
the other part of it on page four.
Producing high-quality output.
So we're done with a lot
of the print dialog stuff,
and we're moving on to
high-quality output.
So I'm gonna talk about
things as your drawing,
as your application is drawing,
what you need to consider,
things you need to keep in
mind as you're printing.
[Transcript missing]
And then when dealing
with the print quality,
basically,
how do you get the smooth color
gradients to show up on the printed
output that I see on the screen?
How do I get the best quality I can
get for the images that I print?
So Mac OS X has built-in
color management.
It's a great system.
We do our best to make sure that
the color that the user sees on the
screen or the original picture or
scanned item or anything like that
is faithfully reproduced on the other
end when it comes off the printer.
The problem is we can't do it by ourself.
We need you.
We need you to give us
device-independent color.
How do you do that, you ask?
Draw and calibrated color spaces.
That is the easiest way to ensure
the quality of the image color will
flow through the system correctly.
So basically, your picture on your...
[Transcript missing]
You have the nice yellow.
When you're drawing
with just device color,
basically tying it to a specific device,
you get this orangish color.
So what do you need to do to get this?
Basically, device color is tied to
a specific output device.
Say you have an RGB color 50%
red for a specific device.
That red for that device is
not going to be the same 50%
red on a different device,
whether it be laser,
going from a laser to an inkjet.
So basically,
We don't want you to be tying
your colors to a specific device.
Do it in a calibrated color space.
That allows us to basically
create an intermediary color
that can be translated.
You draw to a calibrated color space,
we can then create this
intermediary color,
and then when it comes time to print,
we can take that intermediary color,
and with the help of the
printer using their profile,
we can create the color that matches.
So basically, we're asking you to draw
with calibrated color.
For any Windows developers out there,
you're probably drawing in sRGB already.
That's the default Windows color
space that you draw in.
You may not even know it,
because Windows doesn't require
you to declare a color space.
On Mac OS X, we do require that you
declare a color space,
and you're already drawing in sRGB.
We're just asking that
you declare it as sRGB,
and not generic RGB.
That way,
you have your drawing code already,
it's already in sRGB.
Just declare it as sRGB,
and that will create the
device-invented color that we need.
So this is what happens when,
a little full chart of what happens
with the color management on the system.
Your app generates color,
your app generates the color for printing
in one or more calibrated color spaces.
One or more is basically,
say on a page you have,
or a document you have,
three different images from
three different cameras.
You're going to have,
probably having two or
three different images,
the images are going to be tagged
with three different profiles
on how that image was captured.
Then we, printing system,
will create the spool file.
If you've drawn in your
calibrated color spaces,
you're done.
The application,
the printing system takes
care of the rest and draws it.
And then with the help of the drivers,
we get the color sync
profile from the driver,
from the printer, and we render into the
actual device color space.
Drawing with fidelity.
This is basically resolution
and bit depth of your images.
We're asking that you don't assume the
destination printer characteristics.
Don't assume that you're always
going to be printing to that
black and white laser printer.
Don't assume that you're going to be
printing to a little label printer.
The user may be printing it out to a PDF,
and we don't want to lose the
data that is present in the image.
Draw up full resolution.
Don't downsample.
Don't ruin the data
that is already there.
The printing path handles the
full 16-bit per color data path.
So what happens, Safari,
let's say Safari encounters
one of these deep images,
which are becoming more and
more prevalent because of the,
you know, aperture and the raw and the,
you know,
using all the raw formats of pictures,
we are getting a lot more
of these deep data images.
And so basically, Safari will encounter
one of these images,
and it will pass it through
the printing system.
When it gets out to paper,
you will get that full high-quality
resolution for that image.
And also you can see,
on some of the pro-sumer
printers that are now shipping,
you can see the difference between the
deep data pixels that are out there.
So how do you maintain the image quality?
Basically you use Quartz.
Quartz preserves all the quality.
CG image source, image curate,
context image, context draw image.
They all preserve the quality.
NS image preserves the quality as well.
During printing,
they will pass the full resolution image.
There's one caveat with NS image,
is basically if you're
going to modify the image,
by basically locking focus on the image,
at that point,
the image is going to be down-sampled
to basically the resolution of
the backing store for that window.
So basically,
if you're not going to modify the image,
you're fine.
If you're locking focus on the image,
then you have to beware.
Then the image processing stuff,
basically core image
preserves the quality.
If you're doing your
own image processing,
preserve the quality of the
images that are going through.
Okay, so now we've learned basically
all the Cocoa ways of printing,
you know,
everything you need from the creating,
customizing the dialogue,
printing out the paper,
maintaining image quality.
For 95% of you, you're done.
That's all you need to know.
But for the other 5%, there
are a few cases where we need
to dive into core printing.
So that's a little blue box that
the Cocoa printing is based on.
Core printing is an
application framework.
It resides in application
services framework.
It's a residual C interface
that provides no user interface.
That's what Cocoa does.
Cocoa provides the user interface.
The core printing provides some
of the lower-level functionality.
It provides the basic opaque types.
They kind of look familiar, don't they,
with the NS printer and stuff like that.
We have the PM printer, page format,
paper, which basically defines the
paper and the margins of such,
the print settings,
which is the settings for
the print dialog and such,
and we have the print session,
which encapsulates the
settings and the format.
It's available to all applications,
but is rarely needed
by a Cocoa application.
There I said, it's that little 5%.
What would you use it for?
Not much for most applications.
You can change arbitrary print
settings like a job title,
or as I said before,
you always want to print 10 copies.
So, you'd say, you know, PM set copies.
PM print settings set copies.
If you want to set the
page size programmatically,
and lastly is basically the direct
submission of PDF or PostScript.
If you're dealing with a
PDF as your document format,
why re-render it?
just do a direct submission of
that PDF to the printing system.
As I said,
it was available in Leopard and later.
There's a few things you need
to know about how to use it.
The NS Print Info contains a session,
a page format, and the print settings.
So basically, if in NS Print Info,
you can call these methods to
get these low-level objects.
One thing we ask is once
you've modified those objects,
you need to let the NS Print Info know
that you've changed those objects.
So we're going to go and sync back.
It will basically re-sync the information
that has in the NMS Print Info with
the settings that are down in the
PM Print settings that you changed.
So basically you'd call
update from PM page format
or update PM Print settings,
which allows a sync to happen.
And we have examples for you on your DVD.
As Howard alluded to,
there are a few header file changes.
One of them is
PM Print Settings Key replaces PM Ticket.
So if you have a include
print core/pmticket.h,
we're asking that you will
need to replace that with
the PM Print Settings Keys.
That's how it says you cannot
build Tioga components.
New development of the Tioga
drivers should be used,
should be done using
CUPS filters and backends.
Cannot build the old style
Carbon print dialog plugins.
New development should be
Cocoa Print Dialog plugins for
drivers and the Anis Accessory
View Controller for Cocoa apps.
As Howard said before,
well-written components will
still run on Snow Leopard.
Then we had to move some files around,
some of our headers around.
On Leopard, PDE plugin interface and
pnprintdialoguextensions.h
resided in the print framework,
which was under the Carbon framework.
They really weren't needed
to be at that high of a level
inside the Carbon framework.
As a Cocoa app, you should not need to
be bringing in Carbon.
So we moved them.
Those files are now in the
application services framework
under the print core framework.
So basically we have conditionally,
we have show examples of how
to conditionally compile this.
Basically replace print in your
include file with print core.
So it's very easy to do.
As I said, we have examples for you.
So now we're done with
the printing system.
From the user perspective,
let's have Michael come up here and talk
about where the real work gets done.
Thank you, Alan.
As he said, my name's Mike Sweet.
I'm the person that created
CUPS in the first place,
and I'm going to talk to you a little
bit about what we have in Snow Leopard
and what the whole thing is.
So, about 10 years ago,
I came into the need of creating
this printing system to support
our customers at the time,
and it's kind of taken off since then.
You find all of the major
Linux distributions,
it's available on all the BSDs
and the commercial Unixes,
and of course Mac OS X are using
CUPS as a standard printing system.
If you go onto the CUPS webpage,
you go on CUPS.org,
you'll see a lot of compatible
add-ons and the developer and user
communities that you can use when
you're developing printing that
needs to access something in CUPS.
Now, CUPS first showed up
in Mac OS X in Jaguar,
that's the 10.2,
and we went on for about five
years doing a licensing deal,
and then last year,
Apple actually purchased CUPS.
And, you know,
it was a little bit of an uproar
when the news hit the net,
but things have been actually
working out pretty well.
We still have the same license agreement,
still the same website,
and still the same group of
people developing the software,
just we're developing it on the
West Coast instead of the East Coast.
And it's kind of interesting,
we've actually had more releases
in the last year than we had in all
the previous years as an average.
Now, as I said, in Jaguar,
we first introduced CUPS.
And that brought,
in addition to the CUPS architecture,
it brought printer sharing that
was missing from previous releases.
Panther added Bonjour-based
printing and printer sharing,
and that was the first time
that Bonjour really got a
lot of exposure that way.
Tiger added per-printer sharing,
so you can actually share
individual printers,
but not all printers.
It was very much requested.
And as you notice,
all of the previous Mac OS X releases
were all based on CUPS 1.1.
In Leopard,
we actually bumped up to CUPS 1.3,
and that got us a lot
of interesting stuff.
Kerberos, IPv6 support,
the full support for deep
color printer drivers,
and some enhancements to the
security model that was available.
And then Snow Leopard and the
seed that you've got has a lot
of new features for security,
but also incorporates some of
the other components that have
previously been separately provided.
Howard showed you the user interface
for the access control list and
the sharing preference pane.
There's some stuff with sandboxing
that we're doing for enhanced security.
I'll talk about that a little later.
And then the driver development kit,
which gives you additional
printer drivers out of the box,
and a lot of tools for
driver development.
Now, I did a little retrospective,
if you will, of what it's been like for
the last year at Apple,
and I noticed something interesting.
On the CUPS website,
we have this bug database,
and we get a lot of
contributions from the community,
but I wasn't sure what
that actually was like.
And when I looked at it,
it turned out that three-quarters
of all the contributions and bug
fixes to the software actually came
from the open-source community.
We have all the Linux vendors,
the people at Sun with
their open Solaris,
are contributing fixes and
improvements to CUPS all the time.
And so, you know, last year alone,
we've only had a quarter of
those contributions coming
from Apple internally.
So it's been really exciting
to see that the project
continues to go on very strong,
both internally and
outside of the company.
So I'm going to talk a little bit
about how CUPS works and give you
a little peek into what actually
happens after you hit the Print button.
So CUPS is based around this
central server called the scheduler,
and it basically manages all the
printers and jobs that are in the system.
If you look in the activity monitor,
you'll see the CUPSd process running,
usually.
It's something that's
run on demand by LaunchD,
so if you don't have any print jobs going
and you're not sharing any printers,
you're not actually going
to see that process there.
But as soon as you hit that
print button in the application,
it'll get fired up.
And it's a very lightweight process.
It just does a few simple things,
and then anything more complicated,
like printing a file to the printer,
actually gets farmed out to other
helper applications so that it doesn't
have to manage a lot of internal
state and use up a lot of memory.
Because it deals with a lot of
security-related things and secure ports,
it has to run as root.
So we have to do a lot of stuff
internally to make sure that
we don't expose the system.
So we have to do a lot of stuff
internally to make sure that
we don't expose the system.
But whenever we run the helper programs,
we run them with another
account called LP,
which doesn't have all
those system privileges.
When we're actually talking to the
scheduler from your application,
you go down through the stack.
The CUPS API talks to the
scheduler using IPP messages.
IPP is the Internet Printing Protocol.
And that's layered over top of HTTP,
which is the same thing
that your web browser uses.
So I have to do a lot of stuff
internally to make sure that
I'm not getting a lot of data.
So anytime the application needs
to send a print job or get the
information about a printer,
it's talking over those
protocols through the CUPS API.
I have a little slide here to show that.
CUPS API sits at the bottom
of all the print APIs.
And you'll notice that the
scheduler uses the same CUPS API.
The APIs are written so that they can
be used both by client and server.
And they're very lightweight,
so we can talk very quickly and
not use up a lot of resources
just to get something done.
and print it out.
Now, once you actually bring up the
print dialog and you print,
several things happen.
One is the print frameworks will generate
this PDF file from your application.
Your application has done all
its drawing and everything.
We get this PDF file,
hopefully with calibrated colors,
and that will get fed into the
printing system to actually
get printed out on the printer.
You'll notice here we have a PDF file,
but there's also this
other file out there,
this PPD.
It's a PostScript Printer
Description File.
That used to be just
for PostScript printers.
In CUPS, it's also used for
non-PostScript printers,
and it describes what the printer can do,
what features it has,
what drivers to use, and so forth.
So CUPSD, the scheduler,
is going to take that file and take
the PPD file that describes the
printer and figure out what programs
to run to get the job to print.
So we start off with a series
of what we call filter programs.
Depending on the job,
there may be a pre-filter that's
applied by the driver manufacturer
to actually convert or examine
the print data before it goes into
the rest of the print filters.
And Apple provides several
standard print filters for going,
say,
from PDF to PostScript or PDF to Raster.
And then that all goes
into the printer driver,
which is typically provided
by the printer manufacturer.
It will take that,
create printer-ready data,
And then we have an optional component
called a port monitor that handles
any protocol level conversion.
So you may need to take the data
from just a raw binary format
and put it inside these frame
packets to go out to the printer.
That's where you would handle that.
And finally,
there's a program called the back-end,
which actually communicates
with the device,
and it takes all the print
data that the port monitor,
the printer driver,
has supplied and feeds
it out to the printer.
Now, of course, the printer often has
something to say about that,
so any status information
comes back over a back channel,
which those programs can read.
And starting in Leopard,
we added a side channel interface
so that you can actually have the
driver communicate with the back end.
It's typically used to find out what
the capabilities of that interface are.
Does it support
bidirectional data transfers?
What's the 1284 device ID?
Other information about the printer.
Now, as I mentioned before,
a lot of the stuff comes from us.
The PDF file we create,
the standard filters we provide,
the port monitors typically we provide
for PostScript printers at least,
and all of the standard backends
for USB and network printing.
And when you got your printer
from the manufacturer,
obviously they provided the printer,
they provided all the driver components,
which means the PPD file,
the driver filter, any pre-filters,
and color profiles, icons,
all the things that go along
with the printer driver.
Now, as all these programs are running,
they're feeding status information back
to the scheduler to say what it's doing.
All those messages go
across to standard error,
so they're just plain text messages.
And, you know, basically,
it'll be things like printing page one,
printing page two, out of cyan ink,
any sort of status information.
Also handles things like page accounting.
So, as I mentioned before,
we like to run these programs
as an unprivileged user,
the user LP.
But the backends, in some cases,
have to run as root to
access security information,
to use privileged ports or interfaces.
So you'll see sometimes the backends
are run as LP and sometimes as root.
We like it when backends can run as LP.
[Transcript missing]
So, you've got this seed of Snow Leopard,
and it's got a new version of CUPS in it.
We've done a lot of tuning
in that new version of CUPS,
but there's also some
security improvements,
and as driver developers,
you need to be aware of those things.
I'm going to talk about
that in a little bit.
The driver development kit,
which used to be a separate
download on CUPS.org,
is now a standard part of CUPS.
So, if you're developing add-ons
for those sorts of drivers,
or you're developing drivers,
those tools will be available
on every Snow Leopard system.
The CUPS test PPD command,
which we've asked every
driver vendor to use,
because we use it internally when
we're testing the drivers you send us,
that's been improved again,
and we'll continue to improve it
as we go on to add features to it.
In order to better support printer
utilities and supply-level monitoring,
we have a new interface.
It's actually an old interface
from CUPS that's just being
adopted in Snow Leopard.
We added the operation to support
the job preview in the printer proxy.
It allows us to securely allow any user
that submitted a job or an administrator
to actually view the contents of a job.
And finally,
we always update the web interface.
It's been updated again.
And even better, we've added a new
interface to the printer.
better online documentation.
So, on the security front, last WWDC,
if you were here,
we introduced something for
Leopard called Seatbelt.
It's now just officially
known as Sandbox,
and it basically allows us to
control what a program can do.
So, we looked at that, and we said,
we want to use this at some
level in CUPS to further
secure the printing system.
So, what you'll see in Snow Leopard is
we've used it to limit your write
access to the file system and the
read access to the print job files.
From the standpoint of a printer driver,
it means that you can no longer
write files to library printers,
or to user home directories,
for that matter.
And for the print job filters themselves,
they can only access the files that are
associated with the job you're printing.
So, previously,
if you were to install a malicious
piece of printer driver software,
it could actually collect all of
the spool files on your system and
then email them to somebody or,
you know, send it somehow,
so that that potentially confidential
information would be exposed.
So, this new security improvement
prevents that from happening.
Now, the CUPS DDK,
if you're not familiar with it,
it's the driver development kit for CUPS.
It includes several components.
One of them is a PPD compiler
for creating PPD files
for your printer drivers.
That's been improved.
You can now localize with strings files,
which are the standard for Mac OS X.
We've added support for
conditional directives,
long file names, and a test mode.
And then we've added in all of the
drivers from there so that they can
be used in a standard Mac install.
If you provide driver information files,
which are the files that
the PPD compiler consumes,
you can actually install
them in library printers,
ppds.drv, and the printing system
will be able to use them.
[Transcript missing]
"It gets out to the printer,
the printer can feed back the
information that you need,
and then you can feed that
back up to your utility.
So instead of talking
directly to the device,
you just talk through CUPS."
The web interface here,
just a quick little blurb,
the online help is the
most common page to use.
Fully searchable,
has additional information for driver
development and application development
if you need to go to the CUPS level.
And for additional information,
we've got some links here.
If you have bugs that you find,
report them, please.
Please report them.
Bugreport.apple.com.
The developer website
has a page on printing.
There is a mailing list for printing.
There's also CUPS mailing list,
CUPS website that have resources there,
so please do use those.
If you have any questions for this, Mr.
Paul Danbold is our technology
evangelist for this.
And for developing your user interfaces,
we do have the human interface
guidelines that you can use.
And finally, a reminder,
later this afternoon
we have image capture.
And we'll see you all in a few
minutes down in the printing lab.